---
layout: post
title:  "Rust in 2018: a people perspective"
---

The [call for #Rust2018 blog posts] has generated a fantastic set of responses
so far, and there's already an emerging consensus around much of the technical
focus for the year. Since I largely agree with what others have said on that
front, I want to focus my post on the *people* side of things: what kind of
impact do we want to make on people, both contributors and customers, in 2018?

[call for #Rust2018 blog posts]: https://blog.rust-lang.org/2018/01/03/new-years-rust-a-call-for-community-blogposts.html

## Tell our story with a new *product*

Rust, like major web browsers, ships a new version every six weeks. There are a
ton of advantages to this rapid release process, but two major people-related
downsides:

- **Contributor downsides**. Part of the appeal of rapid-release is that
  "there's always another train on the way"; there's no need to sprint to land
  something in a given release, because another one will follow soon. But that
  also makes it hard to "rally the troops", bringing together the whole
  community to drive a cohesive set of goals all the way to completion.

- **Customer downsides**. There's a kind of "[frog boil]" effect from rapid
  releases; Rust is always improving, a little bit at a time, so it can be hard
  to fully grasp the large shifts that accumulate, especially if you're not
  following development closely.

In 2017, we merged an RFC introducing [epochs]. While the discussion focused on
the technical mechanics, to me **the thrust of the idea is to supplement our
release cycle with periodic "product" releases**. These are sometimes called
"marketing releases", but I think marketing is just one (important!) part of the
story:

- When thinking about Rust as a product, we shift our focus away from the
  details of particular features, and instead think about the *end-to-end
  experience* of Rust. How do people hear about Rust, and what draws them in?
  What are their first impressions of Rust? What are the major wins and pain
  points at every point from novice to expert? This product focus helps us
  prioritize our efforts on what will make the biggest impact on people using,
  or thinking about using, Rust.

- Part of the end-to-end experience is *coherence*: making sure that the set of
  features available on stable work well together, without major gaps; that
  these features are well documented; that the features are fully supported by
  tools like IDEs; that the compiler provides top-notch error messages for the
  full set of features; that there is likewise a coherent set of libraries
  available in the ecosystem that works well with the set of currently-stable
  features.

- Aiming for a major product release gives us an opportunity, as a community, to
  come together and do something *big* that goes well beyond the usual six week
  cycle. We've seen this effect leading up to the Rust 1.0 release, and also
  with the more recent [impl period]. A product release gives us focus and drive.

- Finally, there's the marketing aspect, which comes in several
  layers. Releasing "Rust 2018" gives us a chance to say to the world that "Rust
  has taken a major step since 1.0; it's time to take another look". That, of
  course, ties directly back to the end-to-end experience; we'll want to have a
  polished web site, installation process, etc. For existing Rust users who are
  not deeply involved in Rust's development, the product release gives a way to
  understand Rust's evolution as an overarching narrative. We can explain how
  the features stabilized since the previous epoch all fit together to establish
  new idioms.

I believe that 2018 should be an "epoch year", in which we focus on shipping a
quality product, for all of the above reasons. That's going to require a lot of
discipline, and a steady stream of stabilizations, but I think we're up to the
challenge!

[frog boil]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boiling_frog
[epochs]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/2052
[impl period]: https://blog.rust-lang.org/2017/09/18/impl-future-for-rust.html

## Empower new technical leaders

I'm really proud of the work we did in 2017 to grow Rust's formal teams,
including creating several new subteams and expanding all of the existing
ones. But we're still suffering from a deficit of technical leadership. That's
in part because technical leadership is a hard job with mostly intangible
effects; it's largely about enabling *other* people to do the on-the-ground
technical work, by working to reach consensus on constraints and high-level
design. It requires enormous empathy, being able to understand the goals of a
wide variety of people and thread the needle between them. And it often
*doesn't* involve landing reams of code with your avatar attached to them.

One of my personal lessons from 2017 is that we need to Think Big when it comes
to Rust's teams. Rust is a staggeringly large project with a huge and talented
community, and we need its leadership structure to fully reflect that if we are
to reach our full potential.

Concretely, this might look like:

- Continuing to grow and subdivide the teams, so that we have more people in
  total involved in leadership and decision-making, but each individual has a
  narrower focus relative to today. This echos [Niko's points about impl period
  working groups], which was one such attempt. Splitting up the "tools" team
  into "dev tools", "cargo", and "infrastructure" in 2017 was another such
  example.

- By the end of the year, having no single person leading more than one
  subteam. That would hopefully reflect a greater degree of importance and
  accountability around team leadership.

- Improving the RFC process to make it more manageable for team members and the
  broader community alike. There are some strawman ideas on this front floating
  around, which will hopefully get written up soon.

[Niko's points about impl period working groups]: http://smallcultfollowing.com/babysteps/blog/2018/01/05/lessons-from-the-impl-period/#worked-mostly-well-smaller-working-groups

In general, the point is that there's potential for much greater parallelism
within the Rust community than we have today, but to unlock that parallelism
we need to grow our leadership capacity.

## Engage corporations as users and sponsors

Rust's adoption approach so far has been relatively "bottom up": create a
product with some strong potential business value, and focus largely on getting
engineers "on the ground" to see that business value and work toward adopting it
in their organization. Those engineers usually find small ways to use Rust, to
prove it out in their organization, before getting more ambitious. It's a great
strategy.

However, as we seek to push further into larger, more conservative
organizations, we need to supplement this bottom-up approach with a top-down
one: make Rust appealing to CTOs. The primary way to do this is by making Rust
look *boring* and *safe* as a technology choice. And we do *that* by showcasing
our successes (we've commissioned some white papers to do this), being clear
about where Rust makes sense and where it doesn't, and projecting maturity,
stability, and sustainability.

In 2018, we should take all of these efforts to the next level. We should have a
polished web site that works for both engineers *and* CTOs, offering white
papers and directing companies to sources of training, consulting, and
support. And we should have a large and growing list of sponsors, like Mozilla,
[Bouyant], and [Tilde] and many others, who are funding Rust work in one way or
another, either by paying their staff to contribute to Rust OSS, or by helping
pay for project infrastructure, conferences, and the like.

[Bouyant]: http://bouyant.io/
[Tilde]: http://tilde.io/

Finally, we should do more to get production users engaged, at some level, in
the RFC process. When we've talked to production users, the feeling is usually
"we're too busy writing Rust code and we trust you to get it right". But the
result is that RFC threads don't present a picture fully inclusive of the
production context.

## Connect Rust's global community

While we talk about "the Rust community", the reality is that there are *many*
Rust communities, separated by geography and by language. We need to do much
more to connect these communities, again in terms of both contributors and
customers. What are the important use-cases for Rust in India? What are the
interests of volunteers in Brazil? What are the opportunities for Rust in China?
How can we support each other, and communicate our respective values and needs?

Connecting these communities is not a small task, and I'm not sure what the
right goal is for 2018. But I would love to see a greater awareness of and focus
on this issue.

## Serve intermediate Rustaceans

In 2017, we put a strong emphasis on early-stage productivity and learning
curve, which has consistently been the top issue raised by the [Rust
survey]. But last year, we've *also* heard an increasing plea for more
"intermediate" level materials, focused on people who have learned the basic
mechanics of the language and have written some code, but are looking for help
on how to be *effective* as a Rust programmer. How should you organize a
library? An app? When should you use traits? What about trait objects versus
generics? And what libraries and tools should you be highly familiar with?

[Rust survey]: https://blog.rust-lang.org/2017/09/05/Rust-2017-Survey-Results.html

We've made some strides on this front in 2017 with efforts like the [API
guidelines] and the [cookbook]. But there's still a lot more to do in terms of
(1) surfacing crates and tools that "every working Rustacean should know" and
(2) fleshing out more guidance for how to wield Rust effectively, after you
understand the features it provides.

[API guidelines]: https://github.com/rust-lang-nursery/api-guidelines
[cookbook]: https://github.com/rust-lang-nursery/rust-cookbook

## Treat each other with empathy

One of the most amazing things about Rust is that it brings together grizzled
C++ hackers, Raspberry Pi hobbyists, and JS pros and more into a single
community. Rust offers something to all of us, despite that our goals, values,
and interests sometimes diverge. Its ambition is to democratize robust, high
performance code, to make systems programming better and more accessible to
everyone.

The secret sauce has been a certain unwillingness to compromise: to find a way
to take this diverse set of goals, backgrounds and contexts, and serve them all
simultaneously by digging deep and thinking creatively. To keep that up, it's
vital that we don't descend into tribalism or us-versus-them thinking, but
instead to respect each other's constraints, and trust that our constraints will
be heard and respected as well.
