---
layout: post
title:  "Putting bors on a PIP"
---

We have a problem: the average queue of ready-to-test PRs to the main Rust repo
has been steadily growing for a year. And at the same time, the likelihood of
merge conflicts is also growing, as we include more submodules and Cargo
dependencies that require updates to Cargo.lock.

**This problem could threaten our ability to produce Rust 2018 on time**,
because as the year progresses, there will be an increasing amount of contention
for the PR queue. My goal in this post is to avoid this outcome, *without*
reliving the Rust 1.0-era experience of Alex working full time to land massive
rollups.

In particular, the Rust All Hands is coming up next week, and I think it's a
great opportunity to dive into these issues, so after chatting for a while with
Alex I wanted to set out some ideas.

# Goals and problems

There are two major bors experiences we care about:

- Small PRs from early contributors. We want these to land very quickly to
  provide a good contribution experience.
- Major PRs. We want to avoid requiring lots of rebasing, or having *too* long a
  delay before landing.

Let’s say “bors time” is the amount of time a PR is in mergable and r+’ed state
but not yet landed. Quantitatively, the above goals probably map to:

- Low *average* bors time
- Low *maximum* bors time

## Rollups today

Today, rollups generally group together a large number of small PRs; we then
attempt to land those rollups aggressively. **The result is improved average
bors time, but often at the cost of worsening _maximum_ bors time.**
That’s because of a few factors:

- Rollups generally prioritize *small* PRs over *old* PRs. That is, the “normal”
  order for bors is to attempt the oldest ready-to-test PR. But when doing a
  rollup, we cherry pick throughout the queue, and then give maximum priority to
  the rollup.


- Rollups generally bounce on the first couple of attempts, which is “wasted”
  time during which an older PR might have been able to merge.

In addition, rollups tend to cause a need for rebasing, which for major PRs
introduces significant extra latency: the author has to get around to doing a
rebase, then get back in the queue, with a non-trivial chance of being
pre-empted by *another* rollup that requires further rebasing.

## Overall queue length

The steady state of the queue has been worsening over time. The average queue
length has roughly quadrupled over the last year, from 5 ready PRs to 20.

The longer the queue, the worse the situation is for major PRs, because the
effects of rollups and rebase requirements is multiplied by the standing queue
length.

# Some ideas

I believe that, because of rollups, our current *average* bors time remains
tolerable. But our *maximum* bors time has gotten quite bad as the steady-state
queue size has continued to grow. We need to rebalance.

## Reduce absolute cycle time

The most direct action is to reduce absolute cycle time by improving the build
system. That will help across the board, and there is usually low-hanging fruit
to be had on whatever our current-slowest build scenarios are.

I'm not qualified to say much more here, but I'm hopeful that, during the All
Hands, the Infra Team can work together to come up with plans or guidance on
this front.

## Reduce failures

Failed builds are often very expensive, since failures often occur late in the
build cycle, meaning that we lose ~2.5 hours of serialized work.

### Spurious failures

Currently, spurious failures *largely* come down to timeouts; reducing absolute
cycle time will help.

More radically, we could consider storing artifacts at each build stage,
allowing us to retry a build without going through the cycle scratch. But that
would amount to a complete reworking of the build system, and probably isn't
plausible for the Rust 2018 timeline.

### Legit failures

But there are also “legit” failures — and there’s potentially a lot we could do
to help there. We effectively have a two-stage CI system today:

- **Stage 1**: automatic PR testing. Today this is a single Travis build, hence
  a small slice of our overall test suite. **Stage 1 testing is almost always
  complete by the time a reviewer looks at a PR.**

- **Stage 2**: serialized, full PR testing via bors.

Stage 1 testing is parallelizable and *masks queue length* because it’s
generally dominated by the time it takes to get a review. **We can decrease the
likelihood of legit failures by testing more build scenarios in stage 1.** For
example, we could gate stage 1 on Windows as well as Linux. And we could include
more of the test suite in stage 1. Generally, we have some amount of free
capacity to work with here, and we can always through in additional builders to
get more.

We should also consider strongly gating on stage 1 passing before ever
attempting stage 2 testing on a PR.

More generally, are there ways we can better take advantage of the two-stage
system we have today, and the way in which stage 1 is "masked" by review
latency?

## Being more strategic with rollups

Right now rollups generally gather together a number of “easy” PRs. However,
this comes at the cost of “hard” PRs, because rollups skip them in the queue,
thus forcing a rebase. And rollups themselves tend to bounce on the first few
tries, essentially blocking the build queue for some period.

Here are some ways we could be smarter about rollups:

- **Prioritize a rollup PR as if it is as old as the oldest PR is contains.**
  That is, in bors’s normal queue ordering, a rollup would not make it possible
  to “jump the queue”. Rather, it would be running at the same time as its first
  PR normally, would, but would be trying to “get more” out of the run.

- **Make it possible to pre-test rollup PRs with a greater number of build
  scenarios, without blocking the queue.** We could do this by expanding the set
  of stage 1 tests (mentioned above) in general, or by having a separate
  “try”-style build command for rollups that tests a larger subset, but still
  much smaller than the full build (i.e. “Stage 1.5”). **We should make it
  possible to aggressively run this larger suite of tests on a rollup build,**
  _before_ going to the full test suite.** The core idea is that a rollup should
  ~never bounce.

- **Fix test failures within a rollup, rather than removing PRs from the
  rollup**. This can be done by pushing changes back to the original PR
  branches. Basically, once we’ve invested in including a PR in a rollup, we
  should “see it through”.

- **Consider including “bigger” PRs in a rollup**, and seeing them through as
  above.

# Data to gather

There's a bunch of data that would be great to have before the All Hands to help
guide discussion:

- How often are we making rollups?
- How many PRs are included in the average rollup?
- How often do rollups bounce?
  - What % spurious?
- How often do non-rollups bounce?
  - What % spurious?
- For non-spurious failures, what are the major cases we’re missing in stage 1
  that we catch in stage 2? E.g., Windows? A particular part of the test suite?

# What else?

Are there other *near term* steps we could take to head off problems with the
queue length? (While long-term improvements are important too, the immediate
risk is that we will struggle to produce Rust 2018 over the next few months).
