---
layout: post
title:  "Futures 0.2 is nearing release"
---

On behalf of the futures-rs team, I'm very happy to announce that the master
branch is now at 0.2: we have a release candidate! Barring any surprises, we
expect to publish to crates.io in the next week or two.

You can peruse the 0.2 API via the [hosted crate docs][docs], or dive right in to the
master branch. Note that Tokio is not currently compatible with Futures 0.2; see
below for more detail.

[docs]: http://rust-lang-nursery.github.io/futures-rs/futures/index.html

## What's Futures 0.2 about?

**The Futures 0.2 release is all about putting us on a road toward 1.0 this
year**. To that end, it:

- Makes numerous long-desired API improvements, many of which are breaking
  changes.

- Positions the crate for significant iteration this year by (temporarily!)
  breaking it into a number of independently-versioned subcrates.

The full details are in the [three RFCs], but we'll review the high level
changes here.

[three RFCs]: https://github.com/rust-lang-nursery/futures-rfcs/pulls?q=is%3Apr+label%3A0.2

### API improvement: explicit task contexts

The heart of the futures library is its task system. But historically, that task
system was almost invisible: information about the current task in 0.1 was provided
via implicit context (a thread-local variable):

```rust
// The 0.1 API for task contexts:
fn current() -> Task;
```

While this implicit context had some ergonomic benefits, it was also a major
stumbling block for learning futures, and meant that you needed to carefully
read documentation to know whether a given function could only be used "in a
task context".

In Futures 0.2, we instead deal with task contexts [via an explicit argument][Future]:

[Future]: http://rust-lang-nursery.github.io/futures-rs/futures/prelude/trait.Future.html

```rust
// Futures in 0.2
trait Future {
    type Item;
    type Error;

    fn poll(&mut self, cx: task::Context) -> Poll<Self::Item, Self::Error>;
}
```

While we believe the ergonomic hit here is minor, we were also encouraged by
an [ingenious construction from @seanmonstar][WithContext] showing how to
recover the ergonomics of the 0.1 API.

[WithContext]: https://github.com/rust-lang-nursery/futures-rfcs/pull/2#issuecomment-363923477

As a happy by-product, the [APIs for working with *task*-local data][task-local] are now
substantially more pleasant, giving direct mutable access to the stored data:

[task-local]: http://rust-lang-nursery.github.io/futures-rs/futures/task/struct.LocalKey.html

```rust
// The 0.2 API for working with task-local data
impl<T> LocalKey<T> {
    fn get_mut(&'static self, cx: &mut Context) -> &'static mut T
}
```

### API improvement: overhauled executors

Executors in 0.2 are *vastly* simplified compared to 0.1, while supporting a
wider range of functionality.

First, we codify that futures are *always* run in the context of an executor on
which [they can spawn additional tasks][spawn]:

[spawn]: http://rust-lang-nursery.github.io/futures-rs/futures/task/struct.Context.html#method.spawn

```rust
// An API on `task::Context`:
impl Context {
    fn spawn<F>(&mut self, f: F) where
        F: Future<Item = (), Error = Never> + 'static + Send;
}
```

Baking in an executor as part of all task contexts makes it much easier to
coordinate execution choices.

The "out of the box" ways of executing futures change as well:

- [The new `ThreadPool`][ThreadPool] executor replaces `CpuPool` as a general purpose
  task executor, and provides a streamlined set of APIs for getting things
  running. It provides "M:N" task scheduling.

- [The new `LocalPool`][LocalPool] executor provides single-threaded ("M:1")
  task scheduling, which is appropriate for mostly I/O-bound tasks. Since it is
  single threaded, [it supports non-`Send` tasks][spawn_local]. This executor is
  ultimately intended to replace the old built-in executor in Tokio.

- The `wait` methods, which block on futures (and friends), have been replaced
  with [a new top-level `block_on`][block_on] function designed to be harder to
  misuse.

A common theme with the built-in executors is removing footguns from the
previous design, either by detecting problematic situations and panicking, or by
structuring APIs in a more natural and intuitive way.

[ThreadPool]: http://rust-lang-nursery.github.io/futures-rs/futures/executor/struct.ThreadPool.html
[LocalPool]: http://rust-lang-nursery.github.io/futures-rs/futures/executor/struct.LocalPool.html
[spawn_local]: http://rust-lang-nursery.github.io/futures-rs/futures/executor/struct.LocalExecutor.html#method.spawn_local
[block_on]: http://rust-lang-nursery.github.io/futures-rs/futures/executor/fn.block_on.html

Finally, there are a host of simplifications to the way you implement executors.
The numerous traits and types of 0.1 now boil down to just two key
constructs: [the `Wake` trait][Wake], which itself has been simplified,
and [the `Context` type][Context], which is very simple to construct, and is all
you need to execute a task.

[Wake]: http://rust-lang-nursery.github.io/futures-rs/futures/task/trait.Wake.html
[Context]: http://rust-lang-nursery.github.io/futures-rs/futures/task/struct.Context.html

### API improvement: core I/O interfaces

The Futures crate will now ship with an async equivalent to `std::io`,
namely [`AsyncRead`][AsyncRead] and [`AsyncWrite`][AsyncWrite] traits and
numerous conveniences for working with them.

[AsyncRead]: http://rust-lang-nursery.github.io/futures-rs/futures/io/trait.AsyncRead.html
[AsyncWrite]: http://rust-lang-nursery.github.io/futures-rs/futures/io/trait.AsyncWrite.html

These traits previously lived in the [tokio-io crate][tokio-io], but they are in
no way specific to Tokio as a backing source of I/O. This new setup provides all
the core I/O interfaces at the futures level, with the intent that libraries can
use them to be event loop agnostic. (Note, however, that codec support will
remain in Tokio).

The traits are also updated in several ways:

- They no longer inherit from `Read` and `Write`, eliminating a major source of
  confusion; instead, there are specific adapters that allow you to pass async
  I/O objects into sync APIs.

- The vectored I/O operations are now based on the more foundational iovec
  library, which allows `AsyncRead` and `AsyncWrite` to be object safe, and to
  decouple from more opinionated buffering stories. Use of e.g. the bytes crate
  can be layered on top.

[tokio-io]: https://docs.rs/tokio-io/0.1.5/tokio_io/

### API improvements: top-to-bottom cleanup

In addition to the highlights above, a whole host of APIs received minor tweaks,
including renamings, generalizations, adjustments for consistency, and so
on. With the 0.2 release, we're clearing out a long backlog of such requests.

The API documentation has also been completely reworked.

### Supporting further design iteration

While we're making a bunch of improvements in this release, there are still some
known issues and places where changes are expected (see below for some more
detail). Our goal this year is to iterate the crate to a 1.0 state, but we
want to minimize ecosystem pain while doing so.

Starting with 0.2, the main `futures` crate is now a *facade* that simply
re-exports from a number of separate crates. This allows us to decouple the key
public APIs--`Future`, `Stream`, and the task system--from the myriad other APIs
that work with them, versioning them independently. These core APIs are provided
by the `futures-core` crate.

The upshot is that most of the async ecosystem can happily interoperate as long
as they agree on a `futures-core` version; the rest of the futures APIs can
usually be used with independent versions without harm. Since `futures-core`
also contains the most stable of the futures APIs, we expect this to cut down on
ecosystem coordination pain as we continue to iterate on the peripheral APIs.

To take advantage of this split, *libraries* are encouraged to use the
`futures-*` crates directly, rather than the facade.

Ultimately, when we reach 1.0, the expectation is that *all* of these APIs will
be re-incorporated into a single `futures` crate, and the facade will be no
more.

More detail about this split is available
in [the RFC](https://github.com/rust-lang-nursery/futures-rfcs/pull/1).

## When will it be published?

TL;DR: most likely within a couple of weeks.

While we've been discussing and vetting the 0.2 changes publicly for some time,
it's important to get some real usage prior to publication. We've made
substantial progress porting parts of Fuchsia to the new release, and expect to
have a complete port soon. We will also be coordinating with the Tokio team,
which intends to release a 0.2 to integrate with Futures 0.2.

If you are a Futures user, you are *strongly* encouraged the look
at [the docs][docs] and, if possible, try porting some code. Please open issues
or reach out on #futures if you run into problems!

## What's the road to 1.0?

Concurrent with the release of Futures 0.2, we plan to release an updated
version of [futures-await] that provides async/await notation *with full
borrowing support*, due to @withoutboats's great work in that area.

[futures-await]: https://github.com/alexcrichton/futures-await

Beyond 0.2, there are several areas where further iteration is needed:

- The initial support for borrowing with async/await will depend on unstable
  features, and thus will be provided by an external "shim" so that the core
  futures crate can continue to work on stable Rust. Once the ingredients are
  stabilized, we will need to update `futures-core` to remove the shim.

- Borrowing support will also entail changes to combinators and possibly core
  traits (particularly `Sink`); we will need to work through the full set of
  ramifications.

- We plan to investigate removing `Error` from `Future` and friends, which could
  clear up some longstanding issues with the combinators.

- We plan to hone our backpressure story with `Sink` and bounded channels.

Changes in these areas will go through the [RFC process](https://github.com/rust-lang-nursery/futures-rfcs/).

Note that some of these changes affect `futures-core`, meaning that there's
likely to be at least one more disruptive bump before we hit 1.0.

We are also working on a book, *Asynchronous Programming in Rust*, that will
provide comprehensive explanations of the library and how to use it, including
exercises and case studies.

## How to get involved

The Futures team wants to grow, and as part of 0.2 we've been pushing toward
Rust-style governance to make it easier to get involved.

At the moment, the most valuable help is review of the 0.2 release
candidate. You can report feedback via issues or the #futures IRC channel.

If you're interested in any of the topics listed above for post-0.2 iteration, or
otherwise see areas to improve, please reach out on the tracker or channel, or
consider writing an RFC!
